feat(vpa): Support for specifying VerticalPodAutoscaler feature gates (#12339)
gardener/gardener: docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md

---
description: In-place updates of Pod resources
---

> # In-place updates of Pod resources

Reviewer: You could add a reference to the newly introduced guide in the documentation index (`docs/README.md`).

Author: Thanks for the reminder, added a reference to the `docs/README.md`.

This is a short guide covering the enablement of `in-place` resource updates in the `Vertical Pod Autoscaler`.

## Compatibility

> `In-place` resource updates got introduced as an _alpha_ [feature](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2023/05/12/in-place-pod-resize-alpha/) with Kubernetes _1.27_ and got promoted to _beta_ with _1.33_.

Reviewer 2: I think the VPA implementation relies on the presence of the `/resize` sub-resource, which only was introduced with k8s 1.33. So the VPA featureGate only works for k8s 1.33 and above. Enabling it on k8s 1.27-1.32 doesn't help – it doesn't have the right API.
This probably isn't explained in https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler/docs/features.md#requirements explicitly enough, but at least the doc mentions k8s 1.33+ as a requirement.

Author: Thanks for taking the time to review the change. I spent some time to instrument a `1.32` cluster with `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` feature gate enabled and I was able to _in place_ update pods managed by a _vpa_ resource. 

I believe having the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` feature gate enabled for `kube-apiserver` and `kubelet` allows the use of `VPA 1.4.0+` with `InPlaceOrRecreate` _updateMode_ with prior K8s versions ( 1.27 to 1.32 ). 

I guess the upstream _autoscaler_ documentation has the [requirements](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler/docs/features.md#requirements) referring to _1.33_ as `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` got promoted to _beta_ with it.

I'll think for further improvements of the _docs_ to mention this as a strict requirement for prior K8s versions. Thanks for brining it up! :)) 

For testing purposes I can provide complete example of my instrumentation/configuration if needed, but still, this is the `kind` _configuration_ that I used to create both `in-place` _enabled_ and _disabled_ clusters:

```yaml
kind: Cluster
apiVersion: kind.x-k8s.io/v1alpha4
name: k8s-1-32-cluster-in-place
featureGates:
  "InPlacePodVerticalScaling": true
nodes:
- role: control-plane
  image: kindest/node:v1.32.0
- role: worker
  image: kindest/node:v1.32.0
``` 

with the one difference for the `in-place` _disabled_ version having `featureGates` empty or:

```yaml
featureGates:
  "InPlacePodVerticalScaling": false
```

The following snippet shows the `/api/v1` (sub)resources having `pod*` prefix for `1.32` with _enabled_ `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` gate:

- __with__ the `pods/resize` sub resource:

  ```sh
  ➜ vertical-pod-autoscaler git:(vertical-pod-autoscaler/v1.4.1) ✗ kubectl version
  Client Version: v1.32.1
  Kustomize Version: v5.5.0
  Server Version: v1.32.0
  ➜ vertical-pod-autoscaler git:(vertical-pod-autoscaler/v1.4.1) ✗ kubectl get --raw='/api/v1' | jq -Mr '.resources.[].name' | grep -i 'pod'
  pods
  pods/attach
  pods/binding
  pods/ephemeralcontainers
  pods/eviction
  pods/exec
  pods/log
  pods/portforward
  pods/proxy
  pods/resize
  pods/status
  podtemplates
  ```

and with _disabled_ gate for _in-place_ updates:

- __without__ the `pods/resize` sub resource:

  ```sh
  ➜ vertical-pod-autoscaler git:(vertical-pod-autoscaler/v1.4.1) ✗ kubectl version
  Client Version: v1.32.1
  Kustomize Version: v5.5.0
  Server Version: v1.32.0
  ➜ vertical-pod-autoscaler git:(vertical-pod-autoscaler/v1.4.1) ✗ kubectl get --raw='/api/v1' | jq -Mr '.resources.[].name' | grep -i 'pod'
  pods
  pods/attach
  pods/binding
  pods/ephemeralcontainers
  pods/eviction
  pods/exec
  pods/log
  pods/portforward
  pods/proxy
  pods/status
  podtemplates
  ```

Reviewer 2: Oh, you're absolutely right, the `/resize` subresource was [added in a PR](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/128266) that made it into k8s 1.32!
Then I guess this may have been usable to some extent since k8s 1.32 together with VPA.

In k8s 1.33 came some differences about how an ongoing or failed resize operation is communicated: They moved it from the `Status` to some `Conditions` and renamed/deprecated existing conditions. (PRs https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/130733 and https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/130902)

I think VPA code [directly relies on those new Conditions](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/ce81a6a43c6617475f219d1036d761715edf45ec/vertical-pod-autoscaler/pkg/updater/restriction/pods_restriction_factory.go#L350-L357) and doesn't cover for the previous 1.32 cases, but as long as you don't hit this scenario, you won't notice a difference.

Thanks for the details and trying it on k8s 1.32!

> `In-place` resource updates got introduced as an _alpha_ [feature](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2023/05/12/in-place-pod-resize-alpha/) with Kubernetes _1.27_ and got promoted to _beta_ with _1.33_.

Reviewer: We could remove some unnecessary _italic_ usage and add information that it got enabled by default with the promotion to beta.

```suggestion
`In-place` resource updates got introduced as an alpha [feature](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2023/05/12/in-place-pod-resize-alpha/) in Kubernetes 1.27. In Kubernetes 1.33, it got promoted to beta and got enabled by default.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestions, updated to formatting and reworded the section in my latest updates.

On the `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` side, with Release [1.4.0](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/releases/tag/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.4.0), `in-place` resources updates are available as an _alpha_ [feature](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler/docs/features.md#in-place-updates-inplaceorrecreate) for `vpa-admission-controller` and `vpa-updater`.

### Kubernetes

> With Kubernetes _1.33_ the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` feature gate, enabling the `in-place` resources updates is enabled by default to all related components and __do not__ require additional intrumentation. Prior versions, from _1.27+_ require the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` feature gate __to be enabled__ on both _kube-apiserver_ and _kubelet_.

Reviewer: Suggestions:
- `intrumentation` -> `instrumentation`
- versions don't have to be _italic_. At least they are not in other docs as far as I am aware.

```suggestion
With Kubernetes 1.33 the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` feature gate, enabling the `in-place` resources updates is enabled by default and __does not__ require additional instrumentation. Prior versions, from Kubernetes 1.27+ require the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` feature gate __to be enabled__ for both _kube-apiserver_ and _kubelet_.
```

Author: Thanks for the hints, updated to docs with the suggestions.

## Configuration

As described in the [compatibility](#compatibility) section, _alpha_ versions of the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` Kubernetes feature require additional configuration to get the `in-place` updates enabled. This section covers the components that need to be configured both on `Kubernetes` and `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` sides.

### Shoot

Since `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` has it's `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate still in _alpha_, and Kubernetes promoted `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` to _beta_ just recently ( in _1.33_ ), we took the decision to allow configuring `in-place` resource updates only on `Shoot`(s) running _1.33+_.

- _Enable_ `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate in `Vertical Por Autoscaler` by updating:
  - `shoot.spec.kubernetes.verticalPodAutoscaler.featureGates` with:

      ```yaml
      InPlaceOrRecreate: true

>       ```

Reviewer: ```diff
diff --git a/docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md b/docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md
index fa40f1719f..23aeae4950 100644
--- a/docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md
+++ b/docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md
@@ -27,12 +27,14 @@ As described in the [compatibility](#compatibility) section, _alpha_ versions of
 
 Since `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` has it's `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate still in _alpha_, and Kubernetes promoted `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` to _beta_ just recently ( in _1.33_ ), we took the decision to allow configuring `in-place` resource updates only on `Shoot`(s) running _1.33+_.
 
-- _Enable_ `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate in `Vertical Por Autoscaler` by updating:
-  - `shoot.spec.kubernetes.verticalPodAutoscaler.featureGates` with:
+- Enable the `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate for `Vertical Por Autoscaler` in the Shoot spec:
+   ```yaml
+   spec:
+     kubernetes:
+       verticalPodAutoscaler:
+         InPlaceOrRecreate: true
+   ```
 
-      ```yaml
-      InPlaceOrRecreate: true
-      ```
 - Make sure `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` Kubernetes feature gate is not explicitly disabled in:
   - `shoot.spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.featureGates`
   - `shoot.spec.kubernetes.kubelet.featureGates`

```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, updated the format in the latest updates.

- Make sure `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` Kubernetes feature gate is not explicitly disabled in:
  - `shoot.spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.featureGates`

>   - `shoot.spec.kubernetes.kubelet.featureGates`

Reviewer: kubelet configuration (featureGates in this particular case) can be also worker pool specific. Worker pool kubelet settings overwrite the global kubelet settings.

See https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/7656b679bbbe73cb91248d0383f1c407335d548e/example/90-shoot.yaml#L129-L130

```suggestion
  - `.spec.kubernetes.kubelet.featureGates` or `.spec.provider.workers[].kubernetes.kubelet.featureGates`
```

Author: Thanks for the reminder, updated the section to include the `.spec.provider.workers[].kubernetes.kubelet.featureGates` field as well.

>   - `shoot.spec.kubernetes.kubelet.featureGates`

Reviewer: ```diff
diff --git a/docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md b/docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md
index fa40f1719f..af6a79f388 100644
--- a/docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md
+++ b/docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md
@@ -33,9 +33,9 @@ Since `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` has it's `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate still
       ```yaml
       InPlaceOrRecreate: true
       ```
-- Make sure the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` Kubernetes feature gate is not explicitly disabled in:
-  - `shoot.spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.featureGates`
-  - `shoot.spec.kubernetes.kubelet.featureGates`
+- Make sure the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` Kubernetes feature gate is not explicitly disabled in the Shoot spec for:
+  - kube-apiserver: `.spec.kubernetes.kubeAPIServer.featureGates`
+  - kubelet: `.spec.kubernetes.kubelet.featureGates` or `.spec.provider.workers[].kubernetes.kubelet.featureGates`
 
 ### Seed
 

```

Author: Thanks for the hints, updated the section with the suggested improvements.

### Seed

For `Seed` clusters, `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` features gates can be managed in `seed.spec.settings.verticalPodAutoscaler.featureGates`. There are no additional Kubernetes versions validation when configuring `Seed` clusters.

### Garden

> For `Garden` clusters, `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` feature gates can be managed in `garden.spec.runtimeCluster.settings.verticalPodAutoscaler.featureGates`. There are no additional Kubernetes versions validation when configuring `Garden` clusters.

Reviewer: The document is great. In general, in our documentation there are the following personas:
![Screenshot 2025-07-03 at 15 11 31](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/06203ae4-823d-4257-973f-3eab635db679)

In this guide, we are mixing information for users (end users of the managed service, Shoot owners) and operators (the folks who manage Seed and Garden resources). 

@Kostov6, @n-boshnakov how can we handle this case? What we were doing in the past was to split the document into 2 documents for the dedicate personas, right?

Author: Thanks for catching this issue, had an offline discussion with @n-boshnakov and decided to go with two `disclaimer` sections for:

- `Seed` clusters
  > **Disclaimer:** The following configurations are relevant for Gardener `Operators` that have access to `Seed` cluster(s).
- `Garden` clusters
  > **Disclaimer:** The following configurations are relevant for Gardener `Operators` that have access to `Garden` cluster(s).

as the difference in the content, between what `Users` and `Operator` personas should see, are minor ( 2 line for each cluster type ).

Reviewer: Thanks for adding the disclaimers.

Don't we still need to denote that this document is applicable for end users and operators only?

```diff
diff --git a/docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md b/docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md
index 3883e5f1cf..be2ab8141d 100644
--- a/docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md
+++ b/docs/usage/autoscaling/in-place-resource-updates.md
@@ -1,6 +1,9 @@
 ---
 title: In-Place Resource Updates
 description: In-place updates of Pod resources
+categories:
+  - Users
+  - Operators
 ---
 
 # In-Place Updates of Pod Resources

```

I recall that the folks shared that the default is `Users`, `Operators`, `Developers`. But in our case it is only applicable for the first 2.

Author: Thanks for reviewing it, added `Users` and `Operators` categories to the metadata. I don't have a strong opinion on this one, but it sounds better to have the relevant categories listed.

---

> title: In-place Resource Updates

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: In-Place Resource Updates
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, updated the title in my latest commit.

description: In-place updates of Pod resources
---

> # In-place updates of Pod resources

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# In-Place Updates of Pod Resources
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, updated the section title in my latest commit.

This is a short guide covering the enablement of `in-place` resource updates in the `Vertical Pod Autoscaler`.

## Compatibility

`In-place` resource updates got introduced as an alpha [feature](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2023/05/12/in-place-pod-resize-alpha/) in Kubernetes 1.27. In Kubernetes 1.33, it got promoted to beta and enabled by default.
On the `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` side, with Release [1.4.0](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/releases/tag/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.4.0), `in-place` resources updates are available as an _alpha_ [feature](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler/docs/features.md#in-place-updates-inplaceorrecreate) for `vpa-admission-controller` and `vpa-updater`.

### Kubernetes

> With Kubernetes 1.33 the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` feature gate, enabling the `in-place` resources updates is enabled by default and __does not__ require additional instrumentation. Prior versions, from Kubernetes 1.27+ require the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` feature gate __to be enabled__ for both _kube-apiserver_ and _kubelet_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With Kubernetes 1.33, the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` feature gate, which enables `in-place` resource updates, is enabled by default and __does not__ require additional instrumentation. Prior versions, from Kubernetes 1.27 onwards, require the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` feature gate __to be enabled__ for both _kube-apiserver_ and _kubelet_.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestions, pushed the changes in my latest update.

### Vertical Pod Autoscaling

> With [1.4.0](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/releases/tag/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.4.0), the `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate, enabling `in-place` for `vpa-admission-controller` and `vpa-updater`, got introduced as an _alpha_ feature. To explicitly enable the feature for `Shoot`, `Seed` or `Garden` clusters, the `Vertical Pod Autoscaling` configurations, for the respective cluster types, need to include an additional `InPlaceOrRecreate: true` entry in the `featureGates` map.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With [1.4.0](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/releases/tag/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.4.0), the `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate, which enables `in-place` for `vpa-admission-controller` and `vpa-updater`, got introduced as an _alpha_ feature. To explicitly enable the feature for `Shoot`, `Seed` or `Garden` clusters, the `Vertical Pod Autoscaling` configurations for the respective cluster types need to include an additional `InPlaceOrRecreate: true` entry in the `featureGates` map.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestions, pushed the changes in my latest update.

## Configuration

> As described in the [compatibility](#compatibility) section, _alpha_ versions of the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` Kubernetes feature require additional configuration to get the `in-place` updates enabled. This section covers the components that need to be configured both on `Kubernetes` and `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` sides.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As described in the [Compatibility](#compatibility) section, _alpha_ versions of the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` Kubernetes feature require additional configuration to get the `in-place` updates enabled. This section covers the components that need to be configured both on `Kubernetes` and `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` sides.
```

Author: Thanks! Updated it.

### Shoot

> Since `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` has it's `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate still in _alpha_, and Kubernetes promoted `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` to _beta_ just recently ( in _1.33_ ), we took the decision to allow configuring `in-place` resource updates only on `Shoot`(s) running _1.33+_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` has its `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate still in _alpha_, and Kubernetes promoted `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` to _beta_ just recently ( in _1.33_ ), we took the decision to allow configuring `in-place` resource updates only on `Shoot`(s) running _1.33 and onwards_.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestions, updated the section in my latest commit.

> - Enable `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate for `Vertical Por Autoscaler` in the Shoot spec:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Enable the `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate for `Vertical Por Autoscaler` in the Shoot spec:
```

Author: Thanks for catching this, pushed the fix in my latest update.

  ```yaml
  spec:
    kubernetes:
      verticalPodAutoscaler:

>         InPlaceOrRecreate: true

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't this be like this?
```suggestion
  spec:
    kubernetes:
      verticalPodAutoscaler:
        featureGates:
          InPlaceOrRecreate: true
```

Author: Thanks for catching this, I've somehow missed it in b/w the examples. Added the missing `featureGates` to the snippet.

  ```

> - Make sure `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` Kubernetes feature gate is not explicitly disabled in the Shoot spec for:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Make sure that the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` Kubernetes feature gate is not explicitly disabled in the Shoot spec for:
```

Author: Thanks for catching this, pushed the fix in my latest update.

### Kubernetes

With Kubernetes 1.33, the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` feature gate, which enables `in-place` resource updates, is enabled by default and __does not__ require additional instrumentation. Prior versions, from Kubernetes 1.27 onwards require the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` feature gate __to be enabled__ for both _kube-apiserver_ and _kubelet_.

### Vertical Pod Autoscaling

With [1.4.0](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/releases/tag/vertical-pod-autoscaler-1.4.0), the `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate, which enables `in-place` for `vpa-admission-controller` and `vpa-updater`, got introduced as an _alpha_ feature. To explicitly enable the feature for `Shoot`, `Seed` or `Garden` clusters, the `Vertical Pod Autoscaling` configurations, for the respective cluster types need to include an additional `InPlaceOrRecreate: true` entry in the `featureGates` map.

> ## Configuration

Reviewer: Doesn't it make sense to add a sentence that you need to instrument your VPAs with `updateMode=InPlaceOrRecreate` explicitly and that `updateMode=Auto` won't start using in-place updates when the `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate is enabled?

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, added a sentence with a reference to the [usage guide](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler/docs/features.md#usage) where readers can find a detailed overview on how to instrument a `VerticalPodAutoscaler` resource with `in-place` updates.

In addition to that, at the bottom of the document, I've listed more external links under `#References` where related  `VPA` documentation can be found. Thanks!

As described in the [Compatibility](#compatibility) section, _alpha_ versions of the `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` Kubernetes feature require additional configuration to get the `in-place` updates enabled. This section covers the components that need to be configured both on `Kubernetes` and `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` sides.

### Shoot

> Since `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` has its `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate still in _alpha_, and Kubernetes promoted `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` to _beta_ just recently ( in _1.33_ ), we took the decision to allow configuring `in-place` resource updates only on `Shoot`(s) running _1.33 and onwards_.

Reviewer: Minor suggestions:
- "just recently" is a statement that will be outdated in 2-3 release of Kubernetes. Then 1.33 won't be a recent release anymore.
- I  personally avoid usage of "we"/"us" in the docs. "We took the decision to allow configuring" -> "It is allowed to configure".

```suggestion
Since `Vertical Pod Autoscaler` has its `InPlaceOrRecreate` feature gate still in _alpha_, and Kubernetes promoted `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` to _beta_ in 1.33, it is allowed to configure `in-place` resource updates only for `Shoot`(s) with Kubernetes version 1.33+.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, updated the document with the provided example.
